Welcome to Research Recap, our research series here on J.P. Morgan's Making Sense podcast channel. My name is Sam Mazzarello, and I lead content strategy for global research here at J.P. Morgan. Today, I'm joined by Michael Ferroli, our chief U.S. economist, to discuss the December jobs report. Mike, great to see you again, and thanks for joining us on the podcast. Thanks for having me back. So, Mike, let's start high level. Walk us through the report and how it impacts your view of the labor market. So we had 216,000 job growth last month, which was better than expected, though with the downward revisions to prior months, it was pretty close to what people were expecting. I think when you look at the fourth quarter as a whole, we had job growth average 165,000 per month, which is the softest quarter of the expansion, but still pretty good and still above what's needed for the replacement of new workers into the workforce. a very low 3.7 percent. Wage growth remains solid. So overall, it suggests, you know, the economy is continuing to grow and that we're not slipping into a recession anytime soon. OK, then let's talk about wage gains. Wage growth came in stronger than expected at 0.4 percent month over month, year over year 4.1 percent. Could wage growth prove a problem for the trajectory of inflation coming down? Yeah. So, again, looking at quarterly averages, in the fourth quarter, wages increased at a 3.7 percent annual rate, which is the softest since 2020, still probably a little above what the Fed would see as consistent with 2 percent inflation. In the past, Chair Powell has spoken about something more like in the mid threes. So if we continue to see the moderation that we've seen, generally speaking, I think we're on a good trajectory for inflation, but we're not quite there yet. OK, let's talk about labor force participation, which we don't always discuss on this podcast. You've written about it before. Labor force participation going up means labor supply is going up, which can in fact put downward pressure on wages. It had been a positive story in 2023. What's your view on the report and in 2024? So one of the more disappointing aspects of this morning's report is that the participation rate did fall three tenths of a percentage point to 62.5 percent. It occurred across all demographics, so it's kind of hard to pinpoint what exactly was the driver of this decline in participation. But one simple fact may be what you alluded to, which is that participation had basically been outperforming, increasing more than expected. So some of that may have just been some payback, what we saw this morning. Last question for you, Mike. In your view, how much is this report going to impact Fed thinking after the pivot we saw at the December FOMC meeting? Right. So earlier this week, we got the minutes to that December FOMC meeting and it didn't suggest they were anticipating cutting rates anytime soon. I think this morning's report probably reinforces that tendency, given that we're not seeing any frightening collapse in employment, so I don't think this will put them in a rush to cut rates. And so we're still comfortable seeing the first cut in June. Excellent. Thank you, Mike, for your insights and time as always, and thanks to our listeners for tuning in. For more research insights, visit jpmorgan.com backslash research. Thanks for listening to Research Recap. If you've enjoyed this conversation, we hope you'll review, rate, and subscribe to J.P. Morgan's Making Sense to stay on top of the latest industry news and trends. Available on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, Google Podcasts, and YouTube. This communication is provided for information purposes only. Please read J.P. Morgan Research Reports related to its contents for more information, including important disclosures. Copyright 2023, J.P. Morgan Chase & Co., all rights reserved.